Hey, YouTube, everyone out there. Thank you so much for showing up for the live show or
watching the recording afterwards. If you're here live, be sure to throw some comments
and thoughts into the live stream and we'll try to make it part of the show. All right,
guys ready to kick this off? Yep. Let's do it. Andre and Aaron, welcome to talk Python
to me. Thanks for having us. Yeah. It's great. Yeah, it's fantastic to have you both here.
What a cool topic, symbolic math with Python.
I think I'd heard of SymPy before,
but I didn't fully appreciate how neat
and how advanced it really was.
So people are gonna enjoy diving into this
and we can talk some internals and whatnot.
And if you're doing anything scientific or computational,
this is certainly a project worth checking out.
But before we get to that, let's just hear your story.
How do you get into programming and Python?
Aaron, you want to go first?
Sure.
So I mean, as far as just programming,
I've always been into computers ever since I was a little kid.
Actually started messing around with programming
and AppleScript and my family's Macintosh
back when I was a really little kid.
but didn't really do any serious programming
till college when I started doing,
taking like computer science courses.
And actually for Python,
my college had a free course that they were offering
to teach this little language called Python.
So, you know, the CS course that I was taking
was in like Java and C and those languages
or I wasn't a huge fan of those languages,
but I learned about this language called Python
and yeah, I thought it was great.
And so, yeah, I was immediately hooked with Python
just because it's so easy to use.
It's so easy to just write a program
and you don't have to worry about compilers
or all this boilerplate.
And then--
- I'd always been a little suspicious of languages
that described themselves that way,
which is ironic given how much I do with Python.
But so often when you hear that,
it's like, "Oh, it doesn't need all the symbols and it's super easy to get started."
That means like, "Oh,
it's really easy to do easy stuff but then you can't do interesting things."
I think one of the things that's special about Python is like you can keep going.
You don't have to stop once you need advanced ideas. That's pretty awesome.
>> Yeah, it really is. You're right.
A lot of languages stop,
But Python, I mean, it's got a lot of advanced stuff as well.
And it's got a huge ecosystem of libraries you can do.
Just pretty much anything you want in it.
- Yeah, for sure.
The big paradox for me is,
there's a joke T-shirt that I've seen that says,
I learned Python, it was a great weekend.
Which I think is kind of true, you can do that.
But at the same time, for many, many years now,
I've been studying Python,
and there's still just so much more to learn.
One about the language and also just like, as you said,
all the different libraries like,
oh, I wanna learn Pydantic now
or this other thing or so on.
Very cool.
All right, how about now?
What are you working on day to day?
- Yeah, so I work at a company called Quansight.
We do consulting mostly around open source,
open source Python, open source data science stack.
I work about 50% of my time on SymPy
as part of a grant, which we might talk about later,
I think.
And I also work on different consulting projects.
Actually, right now I'm part of a project
called the Data APIs Consortium,
which is trying to standardize the array API libraries
for different Python array libraries, the APIs for those.
like NumPy and X-Ray and those types of things?
- NumPy, PyTorch, Jax, CuPy.
So the idea is that all these libraries
have a very slightly different APIs
and it makes it hard to write code against that goes,
that just works against all of them.
So what we're doing is creating a standard API
that all of these libraries will target.
And so you can write code that will just,
will work with NumPy,
but you can also just, instead of importing NumPy, you can import Coupy,
and that same code will run on the GPU, for example.
Oh, that's fantastic. Yeah, that's a really good, ambitious goal.
It sounds so easy, I'm sure it's pretty challenging.
Yeah, well, I think we're being successful. We just released the first version of the
specification, and we've got several libraries that are implementing it already,
including NumPy, Coupy, several others. So it's actually, I think it's being a successful project
and should really help push the Python data science ecosystem forward.
Yeah, it sounds like definitely a good step. Andrej, how about you? How'd you get into
programming in Python? You know, probably in high school. I was trying to figure out when I
got into it. I think in high school, I don't know. I don't remember how I found it, but it was early
2000s I'm guessing, it was before NumPy, I think there was NumArray, I think, it was
the array library in Python. And during my undergrad, I was studying physics, I wanted
to play with mathematical formulas in Python, so that's when I started SymPy. And then I
used Python, you know, pretty much probably close to 20 years now, or over 20 years.
And I cannot say I'm an expert.
You know, it wasn't a good weekend.
I don't know.
A lot of stuff I'm not that great at, you know, but the basics I would say I know pretty well.
Yeah, sure.
I, after my PhD in physics, I went to work at Los Alamos National Lab for about eight years
as a computational physicist.
And I use Python.
I use a lot of Fortran, a lot of computational codes and a lot of C++.
That sounds fun.
There's a lot of Python stuff happening there at Los Alamos.
Yeah, it is. The NetworkX, I think, library was started here.
And then, very recently, half a year ago, I changed jobs. I now work at a company
called GSI Technology, which is a hardware vendor as a compiler developer. And so at Los
Alamos, I started this compiler for Fortran called LFortran. It's a compiler for Fortran,
but it also allows you to use it interactively just like you would Python. It runs in a Jupyter
notebook as well as a kernel. And at this new company, we are also, in addition to LFortran,
creating a new frontend called LPython, which takes Python, but compiles it through the same
pipelines, through the same intermediate representation and all the backends, all
the code is the same. So effectively, it treats Python like Fortran. So the same speed and so
and so forth.
- Oh, wow.
That sounds awesome.
- It is awesome, yes.
- Very, very cool.
All right, well, super fun to be talking about SymPy
with you all today, symbolic math.
I wanna start this off though,
with a write-up from Aaron
that is maybe not what people would expect
as the first topic to introduce SymPy.
SymPy has been in the news a little bit
for the wrong reasons recently, right?
Right, Aaron?
So it was even on the front page of Hacker News
because this company, HackerRank, reached out to GitHub,
sounds like through automated ways,
and said, "We seem to see some math
"that looks like questions we might ask,"
or something like that,
"so we need to completely ban Senpai
"because they're stealing our interview questions,"
or something like that, right?
Give us the story.
What kind of madness was this?
>> Yeah, so we sort of just got this notice from GitHub
that a DMCA takedown had been issued
against one of the pages on our documentation.
And the way the DMCA works
and the way GitHub's DMCA policy works
is when somebody issues a notice,
they basically just have to take it down.
And GitHub basically took down
the entire documentation site for about 12 hours.
And so I've got a timeline of everything that happened here
in this blog post.
But basically, yeah, they had some company
that they were working with to try to find their solutions
on GitHub and issued DMCA takedown notices against them.
And somehow this worth IT solutions company
decided that our docs was one of these,
and they just issued the notice.
And so it ended up taking down our documentation, which
immediately, like you said, it made it
to the top of Hacker News and--
>> It's too outrageous.
>> Yeah, so the notice itself, it was completely ridiculous.
Like there's like the stuff that they were claiming was
their copyright is like probably not even copyrightable.
Like if you look at the examples on
on that documentation page that they took down
they're just like simple math examples.
- Yeah, it was like a X squared minus two solution is,
you know, negative plus or minus radical two, right?
Like that you shouldn't be able to copyright.
I think that actually predates HackerRank Foundation.
- I think it is HackerRank as a company.
- Yeah, so the CEO of HackerRank,
I guess noticed the buzz that was being made about it
and retracted the notice.
So the docs ended up going back online about 12 hours later.
If they hadn't done that,
we would have had to issue a counter notice,
which would have kept the docs offline for about two weeks
before that counter notice would have taken effect.
And that's just because of the way the DMCA law works.
I also explained how the DMCA law works in this blog post.
If anyone's wondering like why would GitHub even do this?
Like, well, they're kind of required
to do this kind of stuff by law.
There are some ways I think they could have improved
what they did here, which I go over as well.
But this DMCA law is-
- It's probably like pointing those out.
- Yeah, so I mean, the DMCA provides
what's called safe harbor for places
that host user generated content, basically.
YouTube, the social media places,
GitHub clearly has a ton of user generated content
that's public.
If you got the source code of Windows or something
and you posted it up there, right?
Theoretically, Microsoft might say,
you know, we don't really want you hosting this.
It's not supposed to be open source.
Please take it down, right?
So that's the idea.
The way it works though is basically once there's a request to take it down, they just have to, here's the part that I think that got missed, decide that it's a valid request and then just take it down.
Like they don't really try to negotiate or determine the right, the correctness of that assertion, right?
Yeah, so they sort of have to stay like as a disinterested third party, I guess.
And the reason is that in order for them to have the safe harbor, the safe harbor status sort of
frees them from the liability on either side, if there is a copyright claim or if there's a lawsuit or something,
they can just say, OK, well, we're just hosting the content.
The law sort of allows them to do that.
But in order to do that, they sort of have to just,
if they get a DMCA claim, they have to just take it down.
And then if there's a counter notice issued,
then they can put it back up.
And the DMCA has these,
the DMCA sort of tells them that if they get a claim,
they have to sort of take it down expeditiously.
And if there's a counter notice,
they have to put it back up in 10 to 14 days.
So it's, there's a lot of parts of the law
that they sort of have to do.
There's some things I think that they could have done better.
And there's also some things that they already do,
which they don't have to do, which are nice,
including they have a repo where they actually post
every single DMCA notice that they've received,
going all the way back to 2011, actually.
- Interesting, that's good.
- So you can actually see all the DMCA notices
that have been issued against GitHub repositories
on that repo, it's github.com/github/dmca.
- Yeah, okay.
You know, I wanna preface this by saying I'm not a lawyer,
so I'm only speculating here,
but one of the things that seems very,
very much like it fell through the cracks,
and this part I think is both maliciousness
and laziness on the Worth IT company,
as well as, you know, sort of either laziness
or disinterest, I guess, from GitHub.
I don't really know how to characterize it,
But this company came and said, on your documentations,
there is content that is copyright,
and it comes from our website, and it just linked
just to the home page of that other website.
You gotta take it down.
That seems like insufficient information to,
or GitHub to go, yeah, well, they said,
there's a website, and here's a website.
That website doesn't like this one, so it should go away.
It should say, do you see these lines of code here?
that was stolen from us and here's where it originates
or, you know, we, our thing is not public
but these are the lines,
they didn't even say what was wrong, right?
It just said, we believe that's what's on this page.
- It was a disaffection even for us
if it was an accurate claim.
'Cause if you look at this page that they put the claim on,
it's a huge page 'cause it's got like
about a dozen different functions on it.
And it just said that they copied our examples.
It didn't say what, which part of the page was copied
or anything.
So yeah, I mean, I still don't know how they even
decided that this was a thing, that somehow their automation
got flagged incorrectly or something.
I don't know.
I don't know if we're ever going to know that.
Yep.
All right, well, I don't want to spend the whole time on this,
but let me wrap it up with a quick thought.
the CEO of HackerRank, Vivek, posted a message that said,
this was not our intended consequence.
Yes, but if you send bots running around the internet
looking for algebraic equations and saying that those are,
you know, like, this is your problem,
even if it was not your intent to do these things.
And so they fixed it.
I don't know what they're doing now,
but they said, we're gonna stop the whole process for now
and figure out what we can do better.
But on the other hand, we should give them props
for donating $25,000 to the Senpai project as a war sari.
That's actually kind of cool.
They didn't have to do that.
- No, they did not have to do that.
And they did send the money, I think last week.
And so just-
- You guys were all on vacation,
like, what is this, Hawaii?
Or I'm just teasing.
If the finances are online, you can find them up.
I think it's on the Open Collective and it pretty much almost doubled our budget.
And so it will allow us to really fund all kinds of cool development.
One thing on this note I wanted to say is that I was thinking,
so when it all started, I thought, you know, this is...
I felt like a little guy completely being crushed by some huge corporation or just this,
you know, they just take down the documentation and GitHub just says,
it's not enough to put a commit to fix it.
You have to excise the commit from the git history.
So we would have to figure out exactly what line was copied.
And so I went to the git history and tried to look about maybe some
of our contributors maybe copied some stuff from hackerrank.
So I went to the history but didn't see anything, did not see any mention of
hackerrank, you know, oh I copied this from hackerrank, didn't see anything like
that, didn't see anything suspicious. But the
the consequence was dire.
And also the documentation is generated
from the SymPy source code.
So really the offending lines are coming
from the SymPy repository itself,
not just the documentation.
So they were like all of Sympy.
- So luckily they missed it.
- We were really, I was like,
well, this might be the, this is terrible.
And then they, oh, and also we thought maybe,
maybe this looks like a spam, you know,
maybe it's just a spam.
So we kind of ignored it a little bit, not ignored it,
but you know, we didn't know.
And so I emailed GitHub right away,
is this real or is this just a spam?
And they got back to us on Monday evening,
say, no, this is real.
And then the next morning they took down
the whole documentation.
So I felt really just,
I spent an hour and an hour spent so many hours
just trying to figure out what we should do
and what the options are.
And I was, it was a Google Summer of Code was,
Redline was on that Tuesday, I think as well.
So I was just super busy with that.
I just felt, you know, this is,
and I'm doing this for free for a simple,
I don't think I've ever paid anybody to work on Simple.
I just felt, you know, this is not right.
And then when it got to Hacker News,
I thought about how can the company,
what can they do to like fix it?
And I thought, you know, there's not much they can do.
The town was wasted.
But then Travis got an idea,
Olyphant got an idea of,
well, why don't they donate some money?
And I thought, you know, this would fix it.
And I didn't think they would do that,
but I'm very happy that they did.
As far as I'm concerned, personally,
I think we are even, they gave us the money
and we can use it to really progress
the development forward.
So I'm very happy that how it all ended for Sympy.
- Sure, you could pay to hire somebody
to work on some important part,
or you could pay to have sprints,
like bring the people together to work together
or something like that, right?
Nice. - Yeah, we're still talking
about what we're gonna do.
- Cool, well, I'm glad it came out well,
But what a wild story.
I've had run-ins like this before
and they are incredibly frustrating.
Even when you're on the right side of it,
it's just like, you know, you're up against lawyers from--
- Yeah, you're on YouTube,
so I've heard that DMCA's can be pretty bad on YouTube.
I don't know if you've ever been hit
by anything like that there.
- You know what's so funny is only once
has it happened on YouTube.
It's happened for my courses.
It's not exactly, it's happened sort of almost in reverse
for my courses.
I put one of my free courses on Udemy as a way to try
to reach out to people who didn't already know
about my content.
Like, I'll put it up there for free.
People can experience it there.
And then maybe they'll go look for other courses for me.
Like, you know, something like that.
Someone stole my free course, started selling it on Udemy.
And it took me two weeks to get them to even take it down.
even though at the beginning it's a picture of me saying,
hi, I'm Michael.
And I'm like, you gotta, we don't believe this is yours.
Like, what do you mean?
Have you watched it?
The person who is the account it's under
is absolutely clearly not Michael.
Anyway, on YouTube, what has happened to me
is I was doing a webcast way back in the day
when people would call in sometimes on phones
and somebody interrupted someone else on,
during the webcast and they put it on hold
and it was really frustrating
because their hold music started playing
back into the webcast and for some reason,
the way it was set up by the company
I was working with to do it, they couldn't stop it.
So there was just like five minutes of hold music
going along with the presentation.
That hold music got a DMCA takedown
and it took down my webcast.
So what are you gonna do?
I didn't really mind.
It was the kind of a crappy thing anyway,
but you know, it was up there and it got taken down.
All right, let's talk about SymPy
because I think this is a really neat project.
Like I said, I'm, when I think about the data science stack
and the scientific computing stack of Python,
traditionally what I've thought of is NumPy, Pandas,
Matplotlib, the stuff that does numerical processing
and then maybe visualizes that
or does machine learning off of it or something like that.
But SymPy, I think occupies a slightly different
but really important space
in this whole computational Python stuff.
Tell us about it.
- Yeah, so SymPy, like you said,
it sort of stands in contrast to these other libraries
in that it's not, it is a mathematics library,
but it's not numerical, it's symbolic.
So the focus is on computing with mathematical expressions
exactly.
So if you tell SymPy to, like you said earlier,
solve the equation x squared minus 2 equals 0,
you'll get the exact answer, square root of 2
minus square root of 2.
You won't get a numerical answer like 0.7,
whatever square root of 2 is.
But you'll get that exactly.
square root of two.
And so there's all sorts of things
that you can do with symbolic mathematics.
People may be familiar with other similar tools called--
it's basically-- it's called the computer algebra system.
There's proprietary tools like Maple and Mathematica.
There are some other open source systems
that people may have used as well, like Sage and Maxima.
So just if you've ever heard of any of those,
SymPy sort of occupies a similar space,
but SymPy, I guess, sort of stands apart from those
in that it's open source and it's also,
it's a Python library.
So if you're familiar at all with Python,
it's really easy to start using SymPy
because it's just Python.
- Yeah, I think people who have not seen
this kind of stuff in action
should definitely go poke around and check it out.
and we'll talk about some ways in which you can play with it
just online with super low effort.
I remember the first time I had been previously using
MATLAB or something like that.
And I saw Maple, which is what one of the ones
you called out, which is a symbolic sort of solving thing.
You can say, oh, here, I wanna do the integral
from negative infinity to positive infinity of this thing.
And it looks like it would come out of the textbook
and it will sometimes even show you the steps.
It's unbelievable.
And that was 20 years ago when I saw it,
I'm like, that's unbelievable
that this computer is doing this.
And SymPy is like that, but for Python, which is fantastic.
- Yeah.
So it's basically,
it's the math that you would learn in a classroom.
Except it can also get very advanced.
Like you said, we can do integrals.
We have lots of very advanced mathematical features.
We have a module for doing various areas of physics,
for example.
- Nice, and it's also the foundation
of many other things as well.
Just as like setting the stage,
a preview is you've got algebra,
you've got calculus, you've got differential equations,
you've got linear algebra and matrices.
There's a lot of good stuff in here.
Andre, do you wanna maybe give us a little run through
of like sort of the selling points of Sempai?
- Yeah, I can, that's very easy.
I was a undergrad student and you know,
if you study physics or any kind of engineering,
a lot of times, even math,
you have to do a lot of simple like,
you know, I would say derivations on paper.
And I remember sitting in a physics class
and I thought, you know, this,
I would like to do this from Python, interactively.
And so that's the idea.
And then of course I sat down and I thought,
well, let's get started.
And my friends were telling me,
you know, what, you know, can I do Gaussian integrals?
You know, it's this integral of exponential
of some polynomial, you know, X squared, for example.
And I said, you know, it cannot because,
but it will make in five years, just not now.
- It's a hard problem.
- I didn't know, and I said, well,
we can use Mathematica, it can do it now.
But, but they asked me,
well, why don't you use Mathematica?
I know, and I said, you know, Mathematica is great.
It's Maple as well.
It's absolutely, as you said, Michael, absolutely amazing that, you know,
20 years ago, and it could do all these integrals and, and the serious
expansion of these functions.
And I was using windows NT when I did that.
I like how old that was.
And so, yeah.
And, but the motivation is to be able to read from Python interactively
allows you to kind of almost program with the symbolics using a language.
that's a pretty decent language that you might already use for something else.
And so what I wanted to do is assign the expression to a variable, then use the
variable interactively and write some scripts to kind of handle my calculation
and maybe save it to a file after that and so on.
And so that's, once you want to program with that, Mathematica, it allows you
to program, but you have to learn their language.
And I like Python more than the Mathematica language.
And so that's why I wanted to have that in Python.
Well, the other thing that from this perspective, sitting on the Python or the
comp size side of things and looking back is obvious.
I don't know that it is as obvious coming from the other perspective of like, Oh,
I'm doing a MATLAB dot M file or whatever.
But in that world, if you work in MATLAB or Mathematica, you can do what
MATLAB or Mathematica does.
Right.
That's a it's really amazing in its specialty, but it's very specialized and limited, right? You can't build like
You know fast api and database driven apps that are doing some of this kind of computation along the way, right?
If you move it to python like this is now
This capability is now accessible
for all the applications not just
within
you know the
MATLAB or maple environment
Yeah, and I guess it's an argument, you know, what's the advantage of Python, let's say for
numerical computing, let's use NumPy or scientific, let's say for scientific computing, what's the
advantage of Python over, let's say, Mathematica? And I think it's not a clear cut answer. I think
Mathematica is great and they've done, actually, it's quite amazing how good job they've done
because they designed the language, I believe, in the early 80s and they did not have to really
modify the language too much in the same spirit. So that's kind of amazing. It's much older than
and Python. So it's quite amazing how far and that it still works pretty well and is
a decent language. But I think what I like about Python for scientific computing, you
know, is that it's open source and it's the language just seems more kind of robust and
kind of easier, more imperative, don't have to really learn too much. It seems kind of
anybody can learn it quickly and doesn't seem to have too many kind of things that would
surprise you.
- Yeah, very cool.
So how long ago did you start on Senpai?
- So I think I started in 2005 or six.
- Nice, it's been going for a while.
- Yes.
- Yeah, that really predates a lot
of the scientific computing frameworks
that are well known today, right?
So you must have felt good about picking the right horse
as you saw, you know, Jupyter or IPython at the time
come along and those libraries like that.
- Way before Jupyter, IPython was there.
Somebody told me about it and I tested it out
and I feel this is pretty cool.
It looks like Mathematica.
And then I later when I talked to Fernando Perez
who wrote it, he said, yeah, it's Mathematica.
That's what I wanted to have in Python.
So kind of the same motivation almost just,
so he kind of provided the foundation
for the interactive part,
with the prompt and the numbers.
One is very simple, but Mathematica used to work.
- Nice.
When you work with SymPy,
we'll see some examples and talk about them in a minute.
You can put it into this like pretty printing mode
where it attempts with as much as it can
within the terminal output
to have more formal mathematical representation.
So instead of like E^x,
it might put a little smaller X up high
and then an E down slightly to the lower left of it
like you would try to write it.
It seems that if it's in a notebook,
it should be able to do even better,
like maybe a LaTeX rendering or something really shiny.
- Yeah, it does.
- Does it do something like that?
- In the notebook, it'll use the MathJax.
So it'll, yeah, it'll just, it'll look great basically.
'Cause the MathJax looks just like,
it's the same as the LaTeX document.
- Like a textbook.
- Yeah.
- Oh, man.
- But yeah, in the terminal,
we use all these different Unicode characters
to sort of render it as 2D text in the terminal.
So that it looks pretty decent in the terminal
considering the constraints of terminal.
And I personally use it.
I mainly use it in the terminal myself.
- Yeah, so let's go and maybe we could walk
through a little bit on one of the tutorials here.
Obviously we don't wanna talk too much code or whatever,
but I do think maybe just touching on this
will give people a sense of what it's like to work with this.
Because--
>>Yeah, so I think--
>>Yeah, give us a sense of what--
>>In the tutorial, there's actually a section somewhere.
Where is that section?
>>This one, perhaps.
>>But didn't get deleted.
It's in the introduction page.
Yeah, it's on that page.
But if you maybe scroll down to the power
of symbolic computation is the name of the header.
>> There you go.
>> So this is just sort of a bucket list
of just sort of a bunch of different examples of things
it can do.
So just to give you an idea.
And actually, you can see there also
you can also see the pretty printing there as well,
the Unicode pretty printing that it does.
That Logitech is doing with the OpenOpus.
>> Underscore printing use Unicode equals true, right?
It doesn't do it by default?
>> Yeah, so in the notebook,
it does actually do it by default.
>> Sure, but not in the terminal or the ripple.
>> Yeah, in the terminal, you need to run this.
Otherwise, it'll just print out
like a one-dimensional string that you would get.
It looks sort of like what you would input.
But yeah, you can see here,
it can take derivatives, take integrals.
If you keep scrolling down, you can see, I think,
limits and differential equations.
You can solve--
>>Let me talk people through just a couple of things
because I think it's a little hard to understand
how this might work.
And the trick, I think, really, Andre,
you tell me your thoughts on this,
is the ability for it to define these symbols
and these functions here.
- Yeah, so the trick is to be able to represent
the expression symbolically.
So you type X plus Y and plus some function sign X,
and in memory, it represents it as a tree.
And it stores the expression in symbolic form.
And then it has all kinds of functionality
that allows you to manipulate the expression,
print it, differentiate it.
So when you differentiate, or let's say an expression
that takes the original expression
and creates a new expression, the derivative.
- Right, with normal math, like pen and paper math,
you don't usually define variables.
Every now and then you say, you know,
let X be an element of like the real number,
such that whatever, but normally you just say F of X
or F of T or something like that, or Y, and it just works.
You needed some way in Python to allow you
to write expressions like X plus two Y
without Python going, I have no idea what that means, right?
- Yes, that's right.
So, and yes, you first have to declare what X and Y is,
you declare it as a symbol, and then you can use it.
We override the Python on operations like plus, minus,
and that way you can construct the expression.
And so what's nice about Python is that
when I started with SymPy,
when I was kind of investigating the idea,
what's nice that Python pretty much allows you
to override all these operations,
and so you can write it almost like math.
in exponentiation, two stars.
The only caveat is that if you write,
let's say one divided by two,
especially, and we started in Python two,
that gives you a zero, I believe.
And that's very confusing from Sympy's perspective
because you would like it to give
the expression one over two, not zero.
And because, and so I don't think there is any way still
to fix that, to override this division.
- At least in Python three, you get the right.
At least you get a 5, but you get a 0.5 float,
double precision float.
- Yeah, yeah, yeah.
- You don't want that.
You want one divided by two as simple expression.
So when you have something like that,
you have to wrap the number one into an integer or S.
- Yeah, or define some kind of symbol with that value
and then use it like, like,
- You have to convert it.
- E from, you know, quadratic equation, right?
You could like that kind of thing.
- But yeah, so you create these symbols
and then you can write simple math
that looks like it's just straight Python.
So you could say X and Y are symbols
and then you could say something like X plus
two times Y plus one.
And that is not evaluated in any way.
It's just becomes this, like, as you said,
as tree, this expression that then you can operate on,
like integrate it, take the derivative of it,
find the limit of it, all those kinds of things, right?
- Yes, exactly.
- Yep.
- Yeah, that's the basic idea.
And you can use it to do any,
basically any sort of math that you would normally do
with that sort of expression,
except you're doing it on the computer.
- So cool.
You can do, you know, just like a real simple example
might be rational polynomials or something like that.
Like if you had X squared minus one is one equation
and then X plus one as another equation.
You could say the first equation divided by the second
and get, geez, which did I say minus,
you get X minus one.
- Yeah.
- As the result.
- Yeah, so simplification is another one
where you can take something and it can figure out
how to simplify it to an equivalent form
that's like dividing out factors and things like that.
- Yeah, okay.
Yeah, these are super neat.
You can do factors.
So like you say, you could say like a polynomial factor.
You know, one of the things, I don't know if I should point this out or maybe this should
have been a warning to the whole show.
If you're in high school or early college, this might be a terrible cheat sheet for homework
and other types of, I mean, it's fantastic, right?
If you're in an algebra course, you can do your work and then you could type this in
and go, "Did I get it right?"
Wham, and out it comes, especially in a notebook, right?
Yeah.
>> Yeah, I mean, I think that's kind of unavoidable these days.
Because I mean, there's also just graphing calculators
that do this.
There's Wolfram Alpha.
I think SymPy is a great way to do that,
if you're going to do it, because now you're also
learning Python, which I think would
be great for someone who's a high school
student or an undergraduate.
Because that's an actually useful skill as well.
It might be even more utilitarian in the long run
than the calculus they're learning.
So yeah, you can do derivatives and integrals
of these equations.
So you could say, integrate e to the x times sine of x plus e
to the x times cosine of x.
And it will give you the result, which apparently
is e to the x sine of x.
I used to be able to do that.
I can't anymore.
>>Well, you can see that the line above it,
it's differentiating that.
So it's just undoing the line above it.
- Oh, I see.
Well, that does a bit of a cheat, isn't it?
(laughs)
- But yeah, I mean, that's, yeah, you don't,
the integration is nice
'cause you don't have to remember all these,
how to do all this integration by parts
or whatever you would do. - Yeah, exactly.
So another thing it can do is like concrete,
I forgot there's like a better term for that,
but integration over a range or something.
So you could say integrate from like negative 10 to 20
of sine of X squared,
or here's an example of negative infinity
to positive infinity.
And it says that square root of two,
radical two, radical pi over two as the answer,
not like point, what is that?
Point two something, something, something, something,
something, I don't know.
Something like that, right?
It gives you the actual theoretical answer,
the exact mathematical answer in symbols, which is amazing.
- It is.
It's amazing and it's also not easy to,
so when I started to say,
"Well, I knew this is not easy to program."
Like, how do you program such an integrator?
It's not easy.
But I figured, you know, if I can at least figure,
at least get the basics, you know,
like be able to represent these equations at least,
that would still be a huge help
because sometimes the expression can be long
and be able to manipulate it.
And then as we were joined with, you know,
So many excellent people, they contributed all the features to it.
Mostly, actually, it was developed by Google Summer of Code students.
And I would not be able to do that.
Let's just put it that way.
It's a lot of work that's behind it.
Yeah, I'm looking at this.
I know these concepts just on pure math are hard.
And then to automate it in general, it's got to be next level.
So other things you can do is like you can define a function.
So here you say, here's a function called Y.
And then you can say, well, what if you had the differential equation that was,
you know, the second derivative of Y minus Y equals E to the T.
Right.
Solve that.
And then sure enough, outcomes the solution for that, what the function is, which is pretty
amazing.
Yeah, so does things like eigenvalues from linear algebra and all kinds of stuff.
Yeah, great.
And then we have in Python, we have str and repr.
You guys also have LaTeX, which is pretty cool, right?
I just call LaTeX on a function and out it comes with like the crazy escape code LaTeX
that you would need for a paper or something, right?
- Mm-hmm, yep.
- Yep.
Yeah, and this actually, I mean,
this is only even scratching the surface
of what SymPy can do.
So it's actually quite a large library.
- Yeah.
I don't wanna focus too much on just the pure math,
but maybe give us a sense of like some of the things
that amaze you.
What do you have in mind
when you're saying that kind of stuff?
- That amaze me?
>> Yeah.
>> I mean, I think the whole thing is amazing still,
even though I know how it works.
And I've been working on it for a while.
But just the fact that the computer
can do the same sort of mathematics
that you would do on a piece of paper is incredible.
Some of the algorithms to do integration and stuff
are also pretty interesting because they
go beyond what you would learn in a calculus class.
There are algorithms that can compute integrals
that you would never be able to know how to compute them just
using what you'd learn in a Calc 1 or a Calc 2.
But those are something that you can actually implement
in something like SymPy.
And then SymPy will be able to do those integrals for you.
Some of the features that--
I mean, if you go on the website,
there's a huge list of features.
I think one feature that we didn't mention
that's maybe worth mentioning is code generation.
So code generation means that you take one of these expressions
and you turn it into basically code for another language,
whether that's C or Fortran or pretty much any language
that you would want to translate it into.
And then you can then take that expression
and basically convert it into something
that you could numerically evaluate very fast
in whatever language you prefer to use.
- Oh, okay.
So you've got your notebook written in Python or something
and you've come up with some expressions
and you're like, I would like to just do that
in Fortran or C and I don't trust myself to get it right.
So just print out the syntax basically.
- Yeah. - Yeah.
- Go ahead, Andre.
- Let's say you want to approximate some function
with a polynomial
so you can use SymPy to do that.
And then at the end you just want the polynomial in the form
that you can put in your production code
whether Fortran or C.
So just tell SymPy to do it and you can copy and paste it
and you know it's correct.
Assuming there is no bug in SymPy.
- Yeah, sure.
I suspect it's probably
- Pretty straightforward.
Once you've got the expression to break it down into,
you know, this is a multiply,
here's where the parentheses that group it
in the expression tree, but--
- Yeah, there's a few places where it's like,
okay, we need to make sure we get the semantics.
The semantics might be a little different
between like C and Python or something like that.
So we need to make sure we sort of translate that correctly.
But yeah, it's, I mean, in principle, it's not that hard,
but I mean, it's also not something you want to do by hand either, because
Yeah, it's super error prone if you were to try to do it by hand. Yeah. Yeah.
It sounds like a great feature. That's that's quite neat.
Maybe we could talk just a little bit internally, Andre, about
how you accomplish this.
Yeah, like how I started it.
Well, just like how does it work?
If I give it an expression of e to the x cosine x,
and I say integrate that, where do you even start?
Yeah, exactly.
Well, the integration, I guess, I don't know,
is more detailed.
There's a couple of different algorithms.
But I'll tell you the basic idea.
The first thing you do, you search,
how do you do symbolic integration?
And there is this famous algorithm called RISH,
I think, algorithm. So you kind of start studying and then you realize, oh, that's like multiple
years of worth of work to implement this. And it's kind of fragile and doesn't always work.
And Mathematica, they as a company, they managed to do that. It's a lot of effort, a lot of work,
and they have to invest in a large teams of people, test it carefully and so on. But
turns out that in practice there are other approaches and it turns out that you can
integrate a lot you know wide classes of functions just by implementing an algorithm that works for
example for a polynomial it's easy anybody yeah you do it right and then you can add some
trigonometric functions so you kind of implement algorithm for that then you kind of build your
way up it turns out when you do that you can make very useful in practice maybe it's not as
powerful as mathematics is, but it's very helpful. So that's how we started.
And then once you have the rules, I mean, first, second, third year of calculus,
there's in math, there is a ton of creativity in the calculus classes. It's a lot of like,
just today we're doing integration by parts. Today we're doing like integration of stuff
that's divided or what, you know, like there's a, there's set algorithms that they tell you to
and once you get the basics, it seems like,
I guess you could compose them.
- Yeah, so that was kind of my initial idea.
Let's just kind of do stuff that we know how to do.
And it's kind of straightforward,
but then kind of the engineering part comes to it as well,
because you don't want,
you want things to always work and quickly,
and if it cannot be done,
you would like to know the answer,
this cannot be done quickly,
not to wait a couple hours until it tries all the formulas.
And so then it just becomes a lot of,
not kind of I would say engineering decisions how to make this all work and I think we are still
not done yet. I think there are a couple I would say promising approaches. One approach is
a certain professor I think or Italian professor I think in Canada he has he figured out how to
take all these rules how to integrate functions and compose them into just a decision tree. So
So you give it an expression and then it just figures out exactly as you said,
is it the polynomial?
Is it like dividing and so on?
And then the decision tree tells it exactly how to go about it to give you the final formula, the integral.
Okay.
Here's the small formula you apply to it or whatever.
So you take all these 5000 formulas and then it takes them and actually uses Mathematica and he composes those into a decision tree.
And then it prints the decision tree as, for example, Python code and so on.
And we still haven't, well, actually, so we have a module for that.
And it's something that what I like about this approach is that it's quick.
In principle, it's quick.
You just go through a decision tree and it gives you a formula
or it says it cannot be done.
and I would like, but you know, there are all kinds of practical issues.
The trees and so when you encode it in Python, it takes forever to import.
And so on.
So we are still kind of struggling with these issues, but it just gives you an
idea of what kind of issues are engineering.
I would say issues are involved in.
Yeah.
- That's pretty wild.
Do you, I mean, have you thought of,
or are you using things like Cython
or other types of speed up type things?
- Yes.
Yeah, I spent, so maybe 10 years ago,
I spent a lot of time investigating
how to make SymPy faster.
SymPy is great, it's in pure Python,
it's easy to contribute to,
and for many things, it's amazing.
Just works and that's all you need.
But sometimes you need either larger calculation
or a lot of calculations, and it's not fast enough.
So how to speed it up?
So we investigated just pure C, Cython,
all kinds of tricks in Python itself to speed it up.
Eventually, that kind of led to the SimEngine project.
I decided, let's just use C++.
It's the only tool that I know
that actually can deliver the performance
and kind of maintaining a bigger project.
And so that's SimEngine, and then we have Python wrappers,
and then SymPy can use it.
So there are modules in SymPy,
such as the dynamic...
the classical mechanical module
that allows you to simulate solid-body physics.
It's able to use Image under the hood, so it gets much, much faster.
Okay, interesting. So this is a C++ project,
but it has Python wrappers for easy Python integration
with SymPy and other things.
Yeah, that's cool.
I think that kind of summarizes a lot of scientific Python.
There's a really great API, and when you ask it to do things,
it takes the data and hands it off to some C layer that actually does it,
or Rust or something like that, right?
Yes. And it's not just writing it in C++.
There are other libraries that are also in C++,
but to make it really fast, one has to spend the time
and figure out how to represent the expression in memory,
how to allocate the memory,
how to...
So we have to make reference counter pointers, for example.
So that's the design I chose.
How to make the reference counter pointer as fast as possible,
things like that.
How to make sure that you can actually maintain it
so that it gives you, if you make a mistake,
it doesn't give you a sec fault, but some kind of a...
In debug mode, at least, some kind of ways to debug it, right?
So there's all kinds of engineering decisions behind the scenes.
I asked it to solve this and it just went poof and went away.
Like I said, something means something.
Yeah, so we don't want one.
But anyway, so the SimEngine works.
It contains kind of like the core, level of the core of SimPy.
Is this what I would, if I go pip install SimPy, do I get this?
Or do I have to do something special to like swap out the computation engine with this?
You have to install it as a separate library.
So if you do just pip install SimPy by default, it only installs SimPy.
but you can do pip install SymEngine.
I use Conda, so you can do Conda install SymEngine.
That installs SymEngine as a library,
and in Python, you do import SymEngine,
and then you use it kind of like SymPy,
and SymPy can also optionally use it kind of under the hood.
- Okay.
Yeah, this looks really neat.
One of the things I wanted to touch on here,
and at the top right of the page,
if I go just to the Senpai page,
it says try it with Senpai Gamma.
And so maybe we could sort of close out
the conversation a bit with just poking around with this
and then maybe highlighting some projects that use it.
So for example, it says,
oh, you could just try some random example.
And it's got like algebraic things I could do.
So it says, you know, polynomial divisor,
I'm coming in and copy this.
And if I go, there's a little calculator like thing
at the top where I go hit equals and it will go and run that in.
>> The polynomial division in this case it looks like.
>> Yeah, like what are the divisors of this thing, right?
Something like that.
>> Yeah, so this is sort of our little version of Wolfram Alpha,
but using SymPy under the hood.
It's not quite as powerful as Wolfram Alpha.
We don't support like natural language input, that sort of thing.
But yeah, you can kind of get an idea of the sorts of things
SymPy can do here.
Maybe one of the interesting ones, if you scroll down
a little bit and click on one of the integral,
the one that says get steps for integrals.
Yeah, how about this?
I am a big fan of E. There's a whole book called
E, the Story of a Number.
Have you guys read it?
No, I haven't heard of it.
You haven't?
E, the Story of a Number is a great book.
It's about Euler and all that stuff.
OK, yeah, so this one says--
- Integral e to the x over one plus e to the two x, right?
- Yeah, so if you scroll down here,
hopefully you should see something that says, see steps.
- All right, yeah, I see under the derivative, for example.
Yeah, that was pretty interesting.
I don't know if this is the one that has steps,
but I saw it in other places.
- Yeah, maybe that's, maybe this example
is not working right now.
- Yeah, yeah, there's some, here, let's do,
- Probably the differentiation of something might be,
I bet it's got some steps for that,
but that was part of what I was talking about with the cheat
and I don't mean that in a negative way,
but like it will show you the steps
as if it was written out in a textbook
of like this one right here, like, look at this.
You're gonna apply the quotient rule,
which is DX of X over G of X equals this.
And then you're gonna apply this.
I mean, this is amazing.
- Yeah, well, I mean, I think it's, you know,
it's instructive, it's not just cheating.
- No, of course it's not.
And I do think it's really instructive
because it's one thing to just go take a function
or an expression and say, take the derivative of this.
And it says, great, it's this crazy thing.
Like how was I supposed to know it was like the tan
of the cotangent of X or like something like that, right?
But if it says, you know, like, look,
here's how we got there.
That's, yeah, that's very educational.
- Yeah, so it's not,
many parts of SymPy don't work like this
because sort of the underlying algorithms
don't really work the same way that you would do it by hand.
But there are some that basically work the same way
you would do it by hand, like differentiation as an example.
So we can sort of extract the steps and show them to you.
- Yeah, this is great.
I'll put this explanation example into the show notes
so people can come back and check it out.
But gamma.sympi.org and then just choose
some of the examples is really how to do it.
And it's how it gets there.
So very nice.
Let's wrap this up by going to sympi.org
And then on sympi.org, if you go just down a little bit,
there's projects using SymPy that are,
they all sound super interesting to me.
You've got like ChemPy, a package for chemistry in Python,
EinsteinPy for symbolic numeric, for general relativity.
Are there any of these that you think are particularly neat
or stand out to you, you wanna give a shout out to?
Either of you?
- Oh yeah, all of them.
But I like the PyDi, for example.
It's a very nice package for, you can--
- Pi dies and dynamics.
- So you can, it allows you to simulate,
get kind of like a robot or pendulum,
like double pendulum, you just kind of tell it exactly
the relations of the body, and then it allows you to write,
and then Pi die can derive the equations of motion.
And those equations get extremely complicated real quick.
Try triple pendulum, it just gets very complicated.
Pi die can derive the equations for you correctly.
And so it's a neat project.
- Yeah, that one's really cool.
The chem pi kind of stands out for me
'cause I've always loved chemistry.
Yeah, any others that you wanna give a shout out to?
- Well, I guess one that I'll mention here actually
it's listed as a Sage.
So Sage is something that a lot of people might know
as sort of an alternative computer algebra system.
>> Yeah, I've actually had William Stein on the show
to talk about it as well from SageMath and--
>> Yeah, so SageSort integrates a lot of libraries,
including SymPy itself.
You can see SymPy is listed there
on the front page of their website.
So if you use Sage, there's a chance
that you're actually just using SymPy under the hood.
So that's one that I like.
A lot of these are making use of that cogeneration concept
that I talked about, where they're basically
sort of modeling whatever chemistry or dynamics
in InSympy, and then taking that expression
and turning it into something that they can numerically
evaluate.
Yeah.
It looks like maybe some quantum computing stuff here.
All right, great.
Now, these are all cool.
and I think probably seeing some uses of it,
might give people ideas for their own projects.
Let's wrap this up, this conversation up,
just to talk about maybe bridging the gap
or bridging the world of computational stuff,
symbolic stuff, and then this numerical side, right?
So I've gone through and I've said,
here's some complex function,
and maybe here's another one,
and I'm going to combine them through whatever in some way,
and then now generate me a second derivative,
or whatever it is I need, or integrate it.
I've now got a new expression.
Can I somehow take that and turn it
into something I can call as a Python function?
Like, here's a number, what's the answer, effectively?
Or here's a NumPy array, give me the evaluation
across the NumPy array?
Yeah, so there's a function called
LambdaPhi, that's L-A-M-B-D-A-F-Y,
which basically does exactly what you said.
It takes an expression and it turns it into a function
that you can evaluate with NumPy.
So yeah, the workflow is basically
exactly what you described.
You use SimPy, derive whatever it is you're doing
using the mathematics of your problem.
And then you put that inside of LambdaPhi
And now you have something that you can actually pass
your data to with NumPy and evaluate it numerically.
- Nice, that's awesome.
Does it effectively use that code generation thing
you were talking about?
- Yeah, so under the hood,
it's basically generating code for NumPy.
- Okay, yeah.
- Yeah, so I mean, you can think of NumPy itself
as sort of a language.
It's got its own set of functions
>> Right, right.
Instead of looping, you do sort of vector operations
and things like that, which you'd want it to do that.
>> Yeah.
There are other functions which you can do to--
instead of calling numpy, if you want to call it through C
as well, there's options for that as well.
But yeah, that lambda phi is sort of the big one
that you need to know if you want to do that.
>> OK, because to me, that seems like a really important bridge.
I've got this idea, here's my theoretical equations.
But at some point, I want to evaluate it and make
the computer generate a graph based on these numbers
or something, right?
Yeah, definitely.
Cool, well, good work on this project, you guys.
It's pretty amazing.
And that explanation thing, Aaron, you had me pull out,
that's really cool.
how much it will say, these are the algorithms we applied
and here's the little lesson to take from
why this makes sense here and so on.
That's way better than just some sort of numerical integral
like you gave me this function and it's 7.2 is the answer.
Like, well, great, but what do I do with that, right?
- Yeah.
- Yeah, so maybe people could use it as a teaching tool,
assuming instead of--
- Yeah, there are people who use it
in the classrooms, definitely.
- Sure.
Yeah, yeah.
All right, well, before we're done,
let me ask you both the final two questions briefly.
If you've got some kind of notable package,
maybe it's not the most popular thing,
but you know some Python package that's awesome
that needs a shout out.
There are probably a lot on this page already
and you've already given some,
but anything you wanna just call out real quick?
- Well, so perhaps unrelated to SymPy a little bit, but--
- Yeah, it can be unrelated, anything.
- Yeah.
Well, I'd have to say one of my favorite packages
that I use is this testing library called Hypothesis.
I'd actually like to make use of it in SymPy.
We aren't using it right now, but I'd like to.
But if you haven't used it before,
the idea, it sort of flips the idea of how you do tests
on its head a little bit.
Instead of sort of coming up with a bunch of examples
and sort of testing that your function does the right thing
on different inputs, you just sort of tell it
what your function should do, and then it takes care
of the job of generating examples.
And the end result is that you end up testing a lot more
of your code than you would with a normal test
and you end up with much more robust code as a result.
So I recommend checking it out.
It's called Hypothesis.
I don't know if you've had Hypothesis on this podcast.
- I have, it's been quite a while.
It's been three or four years at least,
but yeah, it's a very neat project
and I'm glad to see it's still going strong.
I hear a lot about it.
Andre?
- Oh, I was gonna say,
do you want a Python package or any package?
- Python, if you got one, if not, we can fall back to any.
- Yeah, I was gonna actually, I put this also,
I also discovered it kind of actually a little recently.
Yeah, I recommend people to check it out.
- Which one, sorry?
- Oh, the hypothesis.
- Oh yeah, sure.
And I did talk about it way back in the day.
This is 2016, had David McIver on to talk about it.
So that was cool.
All right, and then final question,
If you're gonna write some code, some Python code,
what editor do you use?
- I use Emacs.
- Emacs, right on.
- And I use Beam.
- Oh, and you guys still get along?
- Yeah, of course.
- No, just teasing, that's awesome.
All right, well, thanks so much for being here.
You know, final call to action,
people are excited to get started with SymPy.
Like, what do they do?
How do they get started?
Where do they go?
Well, so the easiest way is if you go to SymPy.org,
like you said, you can try it online.
There's also a link there to download it.
Yeah, otherwise, I would say if you really want to dive in,
you can join our mailing list.
Or you can follow us on Twitter.
We're @SymPy.
And yeah, basically the easiest way to get it
is to just pip install SymPy or condo install SymPy
and you'll have it.
- Nice, Andre?
- Yeah, that's symengine.org
or symengine.org if you like the C++ version.
- Nice, and you have the tutorials that I highlighted,
I'll link in the show notes
so that you can go through on sympi.org as well.
Fantastic, well, really nice work.
I'd love to see you bringing this to all the developers
and data scientists and stuff.
So thanks for being here and sharing Sempai.
- Thank you for having us.
- You bet.
- Yeah, thank you so much.